
Automating Business Tasks with Jenkins
Jenkins Automation

Continuous integration and automated testing are essential to our internal operations, but two seemingly simple Jenkin's features have evolved to be more important than we ever imagined – bash scripts and scheduled jobs.  We were aware of them from the beginning but they were easily brushed aside, we were in this for the CI after all.  Run bash scripts?  Yeah, why not.  Replace cron jobs?  OK, we'll see about that.

Today I fondly look back on the day we created 'Check Version', a Jenkins job that simply runs 'git status' for a given project in a given environment.  Once the Jenkins user is setup for SSH access, it's as easy to create these jobs as it is for non-technical people to use them.  Now a couple of years down the road, we've automated everything from basic Git functions to sophisticated data migrations.

One interesting note.  In the beginning, we gave these jobs user-friendly names but later decided that was causing some confusion and 'Check Version' became 'Git Status'.  Maybe that's a lot to ask, but our teammates soon came to understand the concepts more accurately and it's been a net benefit for all despite the initial challenges.



When we first realized how easy it was to expose a Bash script through a web interface with simple inputs, we just ran wit

 but Jenkin's ability to expose Bash scripts has really helped us automate our internal operations.  Over time it's grown to quite a bit of code, and just now as I'm writing this I'm wondering if I should investigate using something other than Bash... but I digress.  The point is, when exposing these scripts as Jenkins Jobs with web friendly inputs, we allow our non-technical people to accomplish much more on their own.  I wish I could calculate the increase in efficiency somehow, but it's substantial.

Beyond the standard continuous integration and automated testing features, we've put a lot of effort into automating Jenkins to accomplish specific business tasks.  By creating custom bash scripts and exposing them as Jenkins jobs, we're able to give many of our non-technical people super powers. Whether or not it was ever intended to be used these ways, it's become vital to our business process.

Once the Jenkins user has the necessary SSH credentials to navigate the infrastructure, he becomes a virtual servant whom I'll address as 'he' from here on out.  From a centralized location you can schedule what he'll do, when he'll do it, and he'll be sure to report back diligently.

Cron jobs
Bash scripts
versatile indispensible
